The last time we talked to you, you had mentioned that's just what you were finishing up, so
I just wanted to ask a little bit more about it after I read them.
I guess this is sort of a general question, but to concentrate specifically on Q and an
AeroFIL, if I'm saying those correctly.
Yeah, that's correct.
Were they modeled on any particular analogs?
No.
No, not really.
I suppose I'm aware I just came up with a not a full cloth.
Okay, the bigger question, what I was really interested in was the, why is Celtic and Welsh
mythology so appropriate for fantasy?
Well, I think partly because I and probably many of the readers hold our ancestry from
this area, and when you grow up within a culture, you grow up subconsciously with that culture's
myths.
I've taught you many of them in the form of attitudes, the way you look at the world,
expectations and this sort of thing.
I think it's useful for someone to be in contact with the actual mythos of the culture from
which it comes, because that way you can examine more thoroughly the origins and significance
of the attitudes which you may hold.
Okay, you did though use some standard figures from Celtic mythology, didn't you like the
oh, let's say the Grugai, the Puca, the Theishi and so forth?
Yes, they are figures out of Celtic folklore, I guess.
As a matter of fact, as far as I'm aware, all of the figures that I used to come from
that well, as it were.
Okay, you do a great deal to make fantasy characters real, not the usual cardboard stereotypes.
I find this fairly rare in fantasy, and I wondered if it was a conscious effort on your
part, or that's the way you normally would write.
I treat a fantasy character the same way I treat any other character I handle.
I think that, well, myself I'm very bored when I read a character who is an absolute
stereotype.
I suppose that there would be a way to write a stereotype in such a way that they become
interesting, the one that I can think of out hand, is Th White's handling of the character
of Galahad.
He does handle him as a stereotype, but he does it so artfully that you begin to understand
that that's his problem.
A creation which I somewhat admire, but in general, if a writer is not aware exactly
what commodity he's handling, then the writer is in a great deal of difficulty.
Myself, I don't believe that any person I've ever met who's average and perhaps that attitude
spills over into my writing.
Okay, as far as I can tell you've written two books on Eldwood so far.
When you conceived of the idea that series, the two books, did you conceive of it as one,
two, or more books?
No, actually I conceived of it as a short story.
And I got a chance to work with my brother and the two of us together somewhat created
Arafel, made it to visual and I did the story when we did the Don Grant book.
And when it became a novel, I started putting the dream stone together with Eldwood.
And of course they're not long enough for a novel and then I began realizing I was going to have to rewrite the whole thing.
But by the time I'd done all the research that I finally felt that I needed, I had so much material left over
that that's how there happened to be a second book.
That's all that there will be as far as I intend.
Okay, to merchant's luck for just a minute, I guess which is a little before both of those books.
The deal and the emphasis on there, to me anyhow, was on carriage along with a very convincing hard science background.
Did you, I imagine that was quite a bit easier to write than down below station, wasn't it?
It was quite, actually, it was a book I started to write when I discovered I needed background for it.
So down below station happened.
You'll very often find that the books would seem to flow the easiest and to be so simple.
The stories were then quite, quite deceptively simple.
I really do so on the groundwork of a very, very large background.
And that's precisely what happened there.
The world that you've created, the universe you've created for those two books down below station, Merchants's Luck,
is a very complete one.
You've gone to a lot of trouble to set it up.
I wondered if you had sort of, now that you have sort of a future history in hand, if you plan to go on with it?
Well, I already have.
Actually, The Fated Sun sits within it.
It happens considerably in the future.
And in a somewhat different direction, the China books sit within it.
They happen in the opposite direction from the tele.
It's just Telsa, which is Telsa-V.
And actually the only books that don't really fit into it are the band students.
Okay, The Fated Central is one of my favorite series. I guess I hadn't gotten that connection.
Well, actually it's quite remote-centered because it's so far away.
But if you recall, the infamous security organization, ALFIC, is Alliance.
It was founded by Sydney Mallory.
And continually within the Alliance, you have two forces that swing back and forth.
You have the forces of constitutional law as represented by Damon Constantine and down below station.
You have the forces of security in the military as represented by Mallory.
You see a little bit of that in Merchandise Luck.
The less evident down below station because of course it's an transformative theory,
where you certainly see more of Mallory.
And you'll see it again in a book called Forty Thousand in Gehenna, which is, I guess, as of this September.
From Fantasia Press.
And in that one, that's the period just after down below station, in which what I call the Alliance Union period of dirty tricks.
When they formally signed a peace treaty that are out maneuvering for advantage.
And do some rather unwise things to period of Cold War.
Okay, yeah.
Just one more brief question on the world down below station, Merchandise Luck.
Do you plan any more works within that exact same period?
Well, yes, there may be.
I haven't decided.
I'm going to write some more what I call Merchandise Stories.
I think that the figure of the traitor, the person of commerce, after all, what we're going out into space for has been sadly neglected in science fiction.
You know, any fiction is conflict.
And one of the easiest conflicts, of all, to generate is military.
And perhaps in our enthusiasm for writing exciting plots, we go overboard with battles and a feeling, you know, that tomorrow and the future are going to be populated by people with ray guns and warships.
This sort of thing.
And one of the things I've been trying to bring forward is that though perhaps these things will exist in the long run, it's the merchants that are the real heroes.
The ones that ultimately make civilization work.
And in some of the stories that I want to write within this universe, it's going to be a conflict indeed, but it'll be a different sort of conflict.
A conflict of man against hazards, people against adversities of various sorts that are sort of like the tales of the merchant marine instead of the military.
Okay, on the last interview we got listening to it the other day.
We did get a bunch on Richard's luck, even though I hadn't read the book at the time.
So that's probably enough on that particular area.
One I just thought of.
Let me stick an extra question in here.
I'm almost getting down to the end.
Are you moving towards some goal or some vision at the end of this future history, at the end of the civilizations you're setting up?
Well, it's quite a large thing.
I have a book of my own which I doubt the world will ever see, which is merely a list of dates that coordinates the whole thing.
And in the way, I'm telling the story of two superpowers, which begin in about the year 2350 and continue thousands of years into the future in various incarnations.
The shockwave sort of continued through the centuries.
And one of the points is that there are various times the heroes or the villains, some of my stories take place from the union point of view.
Some of them from Alliance.
There are times at which Alliance becomes exceedingly repressive.
Other points at which it is clearly the hero in the story.
There are times in which union becomes very unpleasant in which to live.
And other times at which it affords more freedom than the Alliance does.
So it's more a very long-term story of the life and conduct of states as characters.
But it will never appear in a single book because the story is so strong now over so many different periods and so many different aspects.
I feel like telling, say, the history of Europe and the history of Asia or whatever.
They eventually grow too large even to call them nations.
Okay, in other words, then, you don't have any vision of a future universal Armageddon or some evolutionary spot the human race is moving toward that would, you know, some big culmination of these things?
Well, in a way, a little theme that you saw toward the end of The Bated Sun is a very important marker in this period.
No, I don't see a universal Armageddon. I think we've got more sense than that.
We've at least demonstrated it thus far.
I think that there will be a time, and of course one great change happens within down below the station.
I think it's when, however unwillingly, Earth has to realize that mankind is not to rest real anymore.
There's another important point somewhat further on.
When mankind begins to revise its ancestral ideas about property and place and territoriality, beginning to adapt to space as a lifestyle and a way of thinking.
You see, what they've done at the beginning, they've carried the idea of nationhood and boundaries into space with it.
In an environment where it patently doesn't make much sense, and their contact with the light is somewhat important in informing a part of what becomes a vastly changed outlook on the universe as a whole.
Okay, that book, 40,000 and Gehena, you said that's say between the down below station world and the faded central, is there somewhere between those two?
Yes, it fits actually in between the sequences down below station, Merchandre's look, which sort of overlaps.
Then Serpent's Reach, and then the Faded Sun, give or take, a thousand years or so in intervals.
But Gehena fits in between down below station and Serpent's Reach.
It's a period where Union has decided to cut Alliance off.
Alliance only has one world, and they're really determined to nip that in the bud before they are able to expand to anything else.
And there is, territorially, adjacent to hell.
There's a little spritz of planeted stars, and Union knows it hasn't got enough resources to go in there and take them and develop the planets.
So it decides that it will last them up, so that they become contendable.
And they do that by dropping 38,000 people on each world, without ecological preparation, without anything. They're expendable.
And the idea being that if the colonies take, they will always be a problem for Alliance because they're Union indoctrinated.
If they fail, they will create such ecological disaster that Alliance will never be able to use the place anyway.
Okay, thank you.
Okay, two more. One of them involves your, you've answered this a little bit as you've gone along, some of your future plans.
I guess two things. I would ask sort of a general question about, I assume you'll be writing both fantasy and science fiction in the future.
And secondly, are you planning any more short story collections?
Well, I am...
Okay, short story collections.
Not as such.
If one happens, it will happen.
I suppose that...
Well, I just don't write many short stories.
And most of the short stories I've written have been for, directly for anthologies.
And some of them are going to be the sort of thing that's more or less confined to a particular anthology such as The Pace World, which I do largely for fun.
The question of whether I shall continue to write fantasy, I have, I find...
I used to write a great little more of it than I do now.
And the proportion that I write now is probably the amount that I will continue to write.
Not very much, but some.
Okay.
Okay, I really have one more question.
This is sort of a strange one. I hope you don't take it the wrong way.
But I believe I've read everything that you've published, maybe you missed a few short stories.
But in my opinion, you are getting better.
Now, that's not saying that early science fiction isn't good because it is.
I hope it won't be better.
Well, I was going to ask, are you conscious of yourself getting better?
I'm conscious that things get easier to do.
Perhaps my touch is a little shorter.
It's sort of like riding a horse, you know.
I've just done it a long time. You don't fall off as much.
I can conceive of stories now without any doubt that I can write them.
I used to go much more to the seat of my pants than I do.
I think I'm much more in control of my medium than I was at the beginning.
My goodness, who isn't?
I think you've written a dozen books or so.
You get to the point where you've already discovered how to achieve a certain number of effects.
I hope that I will continue to challenge myself with things that are harder to do.
I think that one of the things that I've enjoyed very much is working.
With a publisher who does not attempt to hold me to one type of literature,
I can write anything I want to write.
I find that's artistically stimulating.
If I conceive of doing a story, I don't have to go before a committee and sell it.
I don't have to promise that I'm going to do it.
I just do it in the confidence that it will work and that it will be bought.
That to me is a very precious kind of artistic freedom.
I hope indeed I am getting better.
I plan to go on getting better.
I don't plan to still at a particular level.
I will continue to experiment with the medium.
Doing occasional strange things and occasional traditional things is the mood takes me.
This is more an observation rather than a question.
I would say the areas that I've been very impressed with and seen you get better in
is one thing, the depth and complexity of your characterization.
But also, especially in these last three books,
Merchandise Luck and Dreamstone and the Tree of Swords and Jewels,
is an economy where you can say so much more in fewer words.
That's very nice.
Economy of expression is something that I'm quite fond of.
I think that one of my earliest idols, oddly enough, is a very dead Roman
to the name of Julius Virgilius Morrow,
who was, I think, one of the world's great masters at that.
Man could say more in two words than most people could achieve in ten
and hit you with the most unexpected turns in the middle of these sentences.
And I always lamented as a student that one couldn't do that in English.
And I did a lot of translating and I did work at it a great deal
trying to achieve what he achieved in the English language coming out of Latin.
Well, I think that it did have quite a bit of effect on my idea of what good style is.
I've always felt that if one could write with economy in plain language
so that you can be easily followed,
that you use the words for maximum effect according to position.
So that things occurred to the reader more or less in the order in which they would occur
to the person in that situation that you had managed to achieve a great load of immediacy
with that effect, that you lived through a scene instead of simply being told about it.
And indeed that is something that I consciously try to achieve,
is to tell the most but I can in the smallest amount of space.
Okay, good.
I'm sure there are a million things I think I've asked,
but then I remember that first interview and I really covered most of the other things I can think of.
So I'll just let that do duty, you know what I've asked before.
So that really, I guess the only thing I would say finally is do you, you know, as brief as this has been,
I'm sure I've left out a lot.
Is there anything you would like to say or get on, you know, to get on that interview that's been published?
Currently I've got a piece coming out this spring called Voyager at Night
and I'm working right now on a sequel to The Pride of Chonor done just because I have a major love of sequels.
But because I do a kind of a future history thing,
sometimes I haven't told quite all of a thing when I get through with an individual plot involving individual people.
So there's more to what happens in the contact than I had a chance to tell in Pride of Chonor.
And there's some questions left unanswered and so all of a sudden the bug hit.
And I felt like doing a book which the Chonor books to me are fun to do.
I enjoy doing it.
And for me they're kind of lighthearted and a chance to deal with a character who absolutely recuses doom and gloom.
So that's been my project for quite a while and actually it got larger than I planned.
So it looks as if there are going to be two Chonor sequels.
As a matter of fact I just started the second one.
My goodness, I would imagine it's not going to be too long and maybe somebody's already done this is to do some kind of essay or timeline on your future history
like I've seen for say Heinlein or Anderson or so forth.
Well some people have inquired about this sort of thing.
The thing that I worry about is that my events currently take place a great distance apart.
I know what the connecting logic is.
As the creator as long as I keep it sort of close to me I can play games with it as I will.
I'm a little nervous about having it set in concrete or print as the case may be.
But I have with or at least I can't even remember if I did it.
I thought at one time about including a little bit of chronology in the tendencies with some of my stories.
I'm not even sure what I got around to doing that.
But I'm a in future stories which may give some people help at any rate.
And I think I could see something like that happening eventually.
Listen, where does Hunter of Worlds fit in?
Oh, Hunter of Worlds is sort of one of those little things that happens often.
A side pocket at a far future time.
It sounds from the viewpoint of the local people very much as if all of humanity is involved.
Actually it's a little area of colonial expansion that didn't work out terribly well.
And I have an idea where it's set which is considerably out beyond where anybody has gotten to yet in my stories.
But it's pretty well out on the trenches I would say probably in the about halfway between Talseti and Sirius.
Trichon out about 40 odd light years.
Plus.
Okay, good.
Listen, I said 10 minutes and I'm sorry I'm well over that now.
I get fascinated talking about these things.
Well listen, as I told you in the later, we're putting together, it's going to be a series of hardback books from this press.
And you're going to be in the first volume.
And this is the first book we've done.
And we're going to have to update all the interviews.
We have to get the author's permissions, the whole thing.
So it's probably going to be, I would say a year at least before it's out.
Oh sure, why are we a figure it's one year between doing it and getting it in the door in the time that it comes out.
But we will obviously send you a copy of it.
Okay.
And we sure appreciate the time you've given us.
I wish you a lot of luck with it.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
We may be seeing it as convention one of these days.
Alright.
Are you headed down to Fantasy Festival?
What is that?
This weekend.
Nope, I'm afraid I can't.
I teach here at the college, or that's the college.
I'm an English teacher.
They got you, huh?
Yeah, I've got a stack of papers to my office ceiling to grade.
And we have two weeks after Thanksgiving before Christmas starts, vacation.
So my Christmas vacation is going to be my big vacation time.
I'm going to California and probably visit some of the places out there.
But I don't know when the next convention I'll go get to is.
But anyhow, good luck with your writing and I'm sure looking forward to it.
Okay.
Thank you.
Bye.